Baguio Overview
The name Baguio conjures, for both the international and domestic traveler, a highland retreat in the Grand Cordillera in Northern Luzon, with pine trees, crisp cold breezes and low verdant knolls and hillocks. Through the numerous decades Baguio has morphed from what was once a grassy marshland into one of the cleanest and greenest, most highly urbanized cities in the country. It has made its mark as a premiere tourist destination in the Northern part of the Philippines with its cool climate, foggy hills, panoramic views and lovely flowers. Being the ideal convergence zone of neighboring highland places, Baguio is the melting pot of different peoples and cultures and has boosted its ability to provide a center for education for its neighbors. Its rich culture and countless resources have lured numerous investments and business opportunities to the city.

Geography
Baguio City is approximately 250 kilometers north of Manila, situated in the Province of Benguet. The area of the city is 49 square kilometers enclosed in the perimeter of 30 kilometers. The developed portion of the city corresponds to the plateau that rises to an elevation of 1,400 meters. Most of it lies in the northern half of the city. The City is landlocked within the province of Benguet, thus bounding it on all sides by its different municipalities; on the North by the capital town of La Trinidad, on the East by Itogon and to the South and West by Tuba. With City Hall as reference point, it extends 8.2 kilometers from East to West and 7.2 kilometers from North to South. It has a perimeter of 30.98 kilometers. The City has twenty administrative districts among which its barangays are divided. 

Climate
Baguio is 8 degrees cooler on the average than any place in lowlands. When Manila sweats at 35 degrees centigrade or above, Baguio seldom exceeds 26 degrees centigrade at its warmest. Baguio is very wet during the Philippine rainy season, which is from June to October. It gets the biggest amount of rainfall in the country, twice the volume of rainfall in the country as compared to Manila. However from November to May, Baguio becomes a tropical paradise, a refreshing break from the hot and humid Philippine climate. Christmas season is when Baguio glows with the nippy winter air. In the summer month of March, April, May, Baguio lives up to its title as the “Summer Capital” of the Philippines when thousands of visitors from the lowlands and Manila take their annual exodus to the city to cool off. Casual clothing is recommended worn with jackets or sweaters in the late afternoons or evenings.

Demographics
The city’s population as of May 2000 was placed at 250,000 persons. The projected population for the current year 2001 is 254,499 and is expected to further increase to reach 275,472 by 2005 and as little over the three hundred thousand mark, 303,540 by 2010. The city has a very young age structure as 65.5 percent of its total population is below thirty years old. Females comprise 51.3 percent of the population as against 48.7 percent for males. The household population comprises 98 percent of the total population or 245000 persons. With an average of 4.6 members per household, a total of 53,261 household are gleaned. During the peak of the annual tourist influx, particularly during the Lenten period, transients triple the population. 

Social Development
Baguio City is now gaining prominence as a regional center for health services in the Cordilleras. The presence of the Baguio General Hospital and Medical Center as the only tertiary health facility in the area complimented by the modern specialized facilities and services of the private sector greatly enhances the city’s capability in the delivery of health services. The presence of a well-placed and community based has prevented the incidence of epidemics and unwarranted breakouts for the past two decades. The health situation in the city can be described as satisfactory. The local health personnel through 8 District Health Centers, 8 Sub-District Health Centers and a Main Health Center ably sustain this. However, while the present systems are functional, foresight in programming available resources as well as expanding the coverage of health services becomes imperative to meet the needs of a rapidly increasing population. Growing concern is becoming evident in the areas of urban housing and sustaining public safety and protection. The city being a high migration area faces problems on squatting due to in-migration. The peace and order situation is generally satisfactory and under in public safety and protection proved to be very effective. This approach involves in different barangays in surveillance, intelligence and crime prevention activities. Premised on the concept of police-community partnership, the implementation of the system is assisted by the 8 police sub-stations or Bababayan Centers strategically located in various parts of the city. The Office of the City Social Welfare and Development Officer served a total of 23,742 clients, 3.82 percent higher than last year. Children were the largest group served comprising 37.21 percent of the total; Followed by the Family Heads & Other Needy Adults (FHONA) with 36.30 percent. The third top clientele includes elderly representing 9.53 percent while the youth group comes in fourth with 7.80 percent share of the total clientele served. Temporary shelter and protective custody were provided to 614 individuals. Majority of the clients included children and stranded clients.

Environment
The City’s main attraction is still its natural bounties of cool climate, panoramic vistas, its pine forests and generally clean environs. Today, it still boasts of 5 forest reserves with a total area of 434.77 hectares. Three of these areas are watersheds that serve as sources of the City’s water supply. Of the City’s total land area, only 467.5 hectares (8.1 percent) still have old growths of pine while 1,137.5 hectares (19.8 percent) have production pine stands and 122.5 hectares (2.1 hectares) are brush lands. The remaining area of 4,021.1905 hectares making up 70.0 percent of the total comprises the developed portion. There are five major creeks/waterways that serve as a natural drains leading to the lowlands. These continue to serve as sources for irrigation of cultural lands along its banks. There are also nine major springs that continue to supply water in various areas of the city, mostly those that have not been reached by or cannot be served by the water system. The overall water consumption expanded by 3.05 percent over the previous year, contributing to the increase is the presence of metered deep wells (private wells) wherein volume of production is being paid to Baguio Water District. Continuing efforts to conserve the environment through public and private sector partnerships are being embarked upon. The City has initiated and persistently implemented its solid and liquid waste management program. The Baguio Sewage Treatment Plant, the only one of its kind in the country, now operates at percent of its rated capacity. The city is currently implementing a citywide installation of secondary bilateral inlet pipes to enable majority of the city to gain access to the services of the treatment plant. Solid Waste Management now covers 98percent of the total 128 barangays. Most of the City’s total households or 99 percent are served regularly. The average solid waste density per kilograms per cubic meter is 300. The volume of waste collected decreased by 0.31 percent. This is attributed to the proliferation of ambulant scavengers who roam around the City pulling out recyclable materials from piles of solid wastes before the regular collection. The facility is now operating at 103.97 percent rated capacity more than last year’s level of 93.32 percent. Its performance continue to improve with 90.04 and 91.11 percent reduction rate of biochemical oxygen demand and chemical oxygen demand compared to the allowable standard of 85 percent. The average Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) in micro gram per normal cubic meter is 200 in 2003 and 198 in 2004, taking into account the air quality of the surrounding areas of the Central Business Areas which are still within the fair to good condition since Baguio City has a good to fair air quality. The Ambient Air Quality (AAQ) Standard is pegged at 230 TSP.

Source: https://new.baguio.gov.ph/about-baguio/


Main source of air pollution in Baguio
The main source of pollution seems to be coming from vehicular exhausts. Over a period of time, Baguio’s image was tainted by worsening traffic and pollution. Motor vehicles, whether parked or not, occupied much of the road space. Pavements were narrowed or eliminated in order to widen the roads to create more lanes for cars.

Baguio became notorious for gridlock, especially during the holidays when thousands of cars would ascend from the lowlands. Because of this, the stench of vehicle exhaust replaced Baguio’s pine-scented air.

Source: https://www.iqair.com/philippines/car/baguio


About Baguio, Philippines
Baguio City is a landlocked, highly urbanized city located in the island of Luzon and within the highlands of the Cordillera Ranges. As to its land cover: 9.81% is declared as watershed and protected forest; 1.41% as parks and recreation areas; 11.04% are open spaces; and the rest are settlement areas. It serves as the gateway to other municipalities in the Cordillera Region. As the only highly urbanized city in the region, it has evolved to become the regional seat of government, a business and financial center, a tourism hub, an educational center, and home to one of the country’s most profitable Economic Zones. The Baguio City Economic Zone (BCEZ) caters to 44 locators which produce textiles, apparels, electronics, plastic products and others. Production output in the BCEZ accounts for the bulk of the Cordillera’s total exports. Baguio City is popular for its pine forests, rich cultural background, as well as for its temperate climate. It is referred to as the “Summer Capital of the Philippines” and the “City of Pines.” It remains to be among the top 14 tourist destinations in the country, and is among the top 20 destinations for meetings, conventions and exhibitions.

Climate Change Mitigation
Baguio City is confronted with a new economic reality, one in which resource constraints and increasing impacts of climate change and natural disasters are influencing growth. Convergent economic and environmental challenges have had dramatic impacts on the community, hampering the City’s continued progress. The city will need to be more responsive to rising demand for food, housing, electricity, and water, as well as adopt strategies to mitigate the impact of adverse events.

Traffic Congestion
One of the most pressing urban challenges experienced now in the City is traffic congestion and vehicle volume increase resulting from increasing tourist arrivals and car modal share (CLUP-Baguio City, 2010-2020). The challenges in limiting the volume of vehicles on the road are further exacerbated by the inadequacy of infrastructure and services for public transportation and non-motorized transport, and travel demand management to effectively reduce private vehicle trips entering the city and within the city.
Currently, private cars have the highest percentage of vehicle volume (but not necessarily carrying the most passenger volume) on Baguio City roads which put immense pressure on the city’s road carrying capacity. The high carbon emission coming from the transport sector contributes to GHG emissions and poses a health risk to the public. Increasing volume of vehicles also contribute to increasing pollution and urban heat in the city. While most residents opt for walking and public transport, many visitors tend to bring their own vehicles, further exacerbating the problem.

Low-carbon Initiatives
Low carbon initiatives are now about to be implemented citywide through the updating of the comprehensive land use, zoning, and transportation plans.  The city will now embark on an ambitious catalytic project that will transform its urban development framework by developing 6 growth development nodes around its peri-urban areas which will serve as transport and commercial hubs. Multi-modal mobility will now be implemented, which will allow green and blue redevelopment initiatives in the inner city area that will make it walkable and inclusive. Mass transportation through “modern jeepneys” and trams are being planned for implementation.  Bicycle lanes and road sharing are likewise given priority. The city has numerous rivers and creeks and these are being considered as another redevelopment space where they will become part of the micro-mobility and parks network.

Vehicle Emissions Reduction
The city’s goal is to create a sustainable and enabling environment that will promote economic stability and ensure the general well-being of its citizens. For mobility, Baguio City has committed to reducing in-city vehicle GHG emissions by 30% by 2025 and 50% by 2030.

Public Transport Improvements
The Local Public Transport Route Plan (LPTRP) for the city is already on its second and last reading at the City Council before its eventual approval.  The plan embodies the modernization of public transport where old vehicles that are at least 15-years old shall be decommissioned and exchanged for Euro 4-compliant or electric vehicles. The city is also one of the pilot cities for Low-Carbon Urban Transport with the UNDP which will test the viability of electric vehicles for mass transportation.

Smart Mobility Plan
The city’s has partnered with private groups to prepare its smart mobility plan where it envisions a transportation system that promotes and encourages the use of alternative modes of travel, reducing dependencies on private automobiles, which will lead to a congestion-free and pedestrian-friendly city, increased community cohesion, and a more urban, vibrant, and sustainable city. Baguio aims to promote a balance on travel efficiency and quality of life, continued economic growth, and a healthy environment.

Source: https://circulars.iclei.org/city/baguio-philippines/


DENR identifies areas of concern in Baguio rehab
Poor air quality, polluted rivers, garbage woes and dwindling forest cover were among the environmental problems that the government will try to resolve during the rehabilitation of Baguio City, according to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR).
Environment Secretary Roy A. Cimatu said the agency has identified six areas of concern that need to be addressed in order to restore Baguio City’s reputation as “mountain paradise.” These are air quality, water quality of rivers, solid waste management, forest cover, traffic congestion, and proliferation of informal settlers and illegal structures.
“We are looking to improve these areas, which have deteriorated drastically during the past few decades,” Cimatu said.
Cimatu also cited a study by the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) indicating that the most critical urban carrying capacity indicators that need to be considered in the city are road length and area, solid waste collection, water supply, liquid waste treatment capacity, forest cover, and urban land for construction and development.
“We deem these factors as critical because the NEDA also estimates that the population in the country’s summer capital will soar up to 530,990 by 2045,” the DENR chief pointed out.
Urban carrying capacity is defined as the maximum level of human activities, population growth, land use and physical development that can be sustained by urban environment without causing its serious degradation and irreversible damage.
Cimatu said that drastic measures are necessary to tackle air pollution in Baguio City, which in 2014 topped the list of the World Health Organization (WHO) Study on Ambient Air Pollution with the most polluted air in the Philippines with Particulate Matter 2.5 (PM 2.5) at 49 micrograms per cubic meter.
“Baguio City’s air quality is troubling because there are more than 2,000 deaths related to air pollution from 2015 to 2019,” Cimatu said, citing data from the local government.
Cimatu said the DENR is also eyeing the rehabilitation of Balili and Bued rivers, which coliform levels are even worse than that of the Manila Bay.
He said the DENR is also looking forward to the conversion of the Irisan dumpsite into an ‘Environmental-Friendly Eco-Park.’. The dumpsite was temporarily shut down last year following the visit of DENR Undersecretary for Solid Waste Management and Local Government Units Concerns Benny D. Antiporda, who found it to be operating as an open dumpsite, which is strictly prohibited under Republic Act 9003 or the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000.
Last year, Cimatu ordered his field officials to saturate Baguio with pine trees and restore its reputation as the “City of Pines” after he noticed the “balding” mountain city.
He also ordered the conduct of an ecosystems research to extend the life of the Benguet pine tree species.
Cimatu also considered restricting construction along the city slopes to prevent landslides.

Source: https://denr.gov.ph/news-events/denr-identifies-areas-of-concern-in-baguio-rehab/


Postcard-perfect images that showcase Baguio City’s status as the Summer Capital of the Philippines hide the bitter reality that it is a most vulnerable city when it comes to the harsh effects of climate change, particularly excessive rainfall, with its resulting widespread flooding, and deadly landslides. And unless concrete, time-bound, and science-based steps are immediately taken, these manifestations of environmental crisis on this tourist, trade, and education center in the Cordillera Administrative Region, are bound to get worse.
Baguio City already holds the distinction of getting the most rainfall in the Philippines, with the average annual volume steadily rising over the past 20 years. And projections are that the volume will increase even more, by an alarming 23 percent over the next 10 years, according to Baguio City Mayor Benjamin Magalong, no thanks to harmful greenhouse gas emissions such as carbon dioxide. These emissions warm up the atmosphere and lead to extreme weather patterns, including stronger and more frequent typhoons.
During the Feb. 9 Baguio Climate Change Summit, Magalong stressed that the city has to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent in 2030, and work down to zero emissions by 2050, to protect the city against the severe impact of climate change seen in more intense rains. The mayor cited the 2020 annual report of the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) Urban Financing Partnership Facility Group, which warned that climate change “is only expected to exacerbate rain-induced landslides and flooding events due to the frequency and intensity of rainfall in the city.”
This is a terrifying prospect, considering that as much as 80 percent of the city is prone to landslides, according to a separate 2021 report of the ADB. These landslides can be triggered as well by earthquakes, since Baguio City is crisscrossed by seismic faults and lies on a tectonically active area. That the city is teetering on the edge of a climate precipice has been known as early as 2011, when it was tagged as the most exposed and vulnerable to extreme weather events compared to other major cities in the Philippines. And excessive rainfall is enemy number one.
“Rain is going to be Baguio’s bane,” said the Business Risk Assessment and the Management of Climate Change Impacts study conducted by the World Wide Fund Philippines (WWF) and the Bank of the Philippine Islands Foundation, Inc. “Extreme rainfall and intensified tropical cyclones will continue to define the city’s future. It is likely that Baguio will go from wet, to wetter,” the study stressed. Baguio City has enough proof of the devastation that flooding and landslides can cause. In 2018, for example, Typhoon “Ompong” lashed Northern Luzon and caused raging floods and landslides in Baguio City, killing 11 people and causing access road closures as well as significant damage to properties.
But Mother Nature is not solely to blame for the city’s woes. Unregulated and unrestricted human activity poses a far bigger threat. The city’s drains, for instance, have been blocked by accumulated garbage when human settlements encroached on the easement areas and narrowed waterways, thus constricting the city’s ability to absorb excess water. This, in turn, can be blamed squarely on Baguio City’s burgeoning population that, as of 2020, stood at 366,358, and is projected to hit close to 500,000 by the end of the year, far outstripping the infrastructure and land limits of a city spanning 5,700 hectares and established for only 30,000 people.
No wonder, then, that the city is ironically suffering from a grave water supply problem that is bound to become more acute. As the WWF study revealed, the city’s groundwater supply is now “grossly inadequate” since the pine forest that used to recharge the city’s aquifers has been felled. Add to this the fact that of the city’s six watersheds, two are no longer operable because of the unregulated influx of informal settlers. This is but one portent of the bleak future that awaits Baguio City, unless a multiyear program is put in place to reverse the “urban decay” that has blighted it.
Development plans have to be immediately revisited and redrawn, and desired reforms, such as the rapid reduction in the city’s greenhouse gas emissions, doggedly implemented given the present hazards caused by rapid and poorly planned urbanization. The right balance should be struck between the desired economic growth and the realities of climate change, urbanization trends, and the overarching need to manage the city’s watersheds, green spaces, and drainage system. Failure is not an option, for the very survival of Baguio City is at stake.

Source: https://opinion.inquirer.net/161238/saving-baguio-city


Acting on Sustainable Tourism for the Environment
The city of Baguio is filled with various natural attractions with its vast wide plains, high mountains, and cool temperature as it remains to be one of the best destinations to visit in the Philippines all year round. From the ground to the roots to the branches and leaves, we breathe the oxygen being released by the trees, with a mixture of flora and fauna which is not the only factor that entices visitors to keep coming in the city, but also because of the culture, arts, and sustainable practices. It gives the visitors a sense of respect for how the locals stay true to their values and city ordinances that are being implemented in the city. The city of Baguio has always been a safe haven for natural attractions and beautiful sceneries that have been standing even before it was sighted by the Spaniards when they first arrived in the highlands. The same goes with the Americans who sought the city as a rest and rehabilitation area, where they could relax, enjoy their leisure time, and escape the heat of the lowlands. After World War II, even after the city was occupied by the Japanese, some attractions remained standing up to this day which goes to show the significance of sustainable tourism in the city. We are to protect these reminders, in hopes to prolong the significance of our history but most importantly, our environment.
With sustainability being practiced in various countries, the City of Baguio also started to implement sustainable practices, as citizens, and being able to adapt and execute such practices is a huge step in our contribution to the preservation of our environment. Sustainability can be achieved through the small things we do in everyday life. With the combined help of both locals and tourists, the city is able to unite in helping each other create a green livelihood for all. Small things such as the usage of eco or paper bags over plastic ones, turning off power outlets or electrical appliances when not in use, or even saving water are among the common practices in living in a sustainable environment which are inlined with the Sustainable Development Goals #12, #6, and #14 or the Responsible Consumption and Production, Clean Water and Sanitation, and Life Below Water respectively. SDG 12 aims to promote the responsible and efficient use of our natural resources as well as reduce waste generation especially plastic through reduction, reuse and recycling. In connection with this, SDG 6 and 14 aims to improve water quality and protect marine life by not dumping hazardous chemicals into waterways and reducing pollution, most importantly plastic that mostly ends up in the ocean causing damage to the marine ecosystem.
Sustainable Tourism helps maintain and prolong the beauty of a certain area, thus allowing the future generations to enjoy the beauty of our surroundings. With Baguio being one of the fastest developing cities in the Philippines, one could wonder how the city maintains its greenery and natural beauty, and well, this is possible through acting on simple sustainable practices, a reminder that a little goes a long way and with camaraderie, anything is achievable.

Source: https://new.baguio.gov.ph/news/acting-on-sustainable-tourism-for-the-environment


Mining Pollution
Environmental problems caused by improper mine tailings disposal in the Baguio district include pollution of the Lower Agno River system and its watershed and siltation of irrigation canals in the Pangasinan plains. Direct economic losses are from reduced agricultural production due to siltation of irrigation works and farmlands. To check the adverse ecological effects of improper mine tailings disposal, government regulations have been imposed on mining firms. Several disposal schemes have been proposed, including the use of the reservoir of a multipurpose project to be sited in the watershed where the mines are located. Because of siltation problems, however, trapping the tailings in the reservoir will diminish the economic benefits that can be derived from the project.

Source: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01867161


Baguio City Takes Steps to Ease Water Pollution
Balili River in Baguio City, Philippines flows through the Valley of Colors, famous for its cluster of houses turned into a huge, vibrant piece of art. Yet, the dull waters of the river imply that the Baguio Sewage Treatment Plant (BSTP) barely two kilometers away is inadequate in stemming water pollution.
To address this issue, the city government took steps to improve its wastewater management together with flood and drainage initiatives. As observed during the recent CDIA monitoring visit, many of these efforts were derived from the pre-feasibility study (PFS) conducted by CDIA in 2016.
Baguio is a highly urbanized city with an estimated population of 330,000. Being the summer capital of the Philippines and an education hub, the city sees tourism and education as growth areas. Along with this growth comes development challenges.
One of which is sanitation. While septic tanks are widely used, a third of the urban population is connected to a sanitary sewerage network served by the BSTP. By design, its capacity is 8,000 cum/day but its current inflow is already 12,000 cum/day. Its saturated condition combined with untreated discharges from communal septic tanks contribute to the deterioration of the city’s river systems.
The Department of Environment and Natural Resources – Environmental Management Bureau has cited the very poor water quality of Baguio’s rivers, specifically the record setting levels of fecal coliform content in both the Balili and Bued Rivers.
Meanwhile, the rugged topography and intense rainfall experienced in Baguio result in flash floods and rain-induced landslides. Climate change assessments predict an increase in the frequency and intensity of rainfall, thus, exacerbating flooding and landslides.
In 2016, CDIA completed a PFS for the Green and Integrated Wastewater Management for Baguio. Its main objective was to improve the water quality of the city’s rivers through the implementation of sound wastewater management initiatives and improvement of the city’s drainage and flood management.
Three years after the completion of the PFS, CDIA, through its Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist Nick Baoy and Urban Development Specialist Brian Capati conducted a monitoring visit to validate reports that some PFS recommended investments have been taken forward and linked to both national and city financing.
In terms of the wastewater component, although there have been no physical improvements yet, significant steps have been taken by the local government. The city has leveraged USD 4 million from the national government/Department of Tourism for the BSTP upgrade and network repair and expansion; and the construction of the Lower Rock Quarry wastewater treatment plant.
Improvements to the wastewater management facilities of the city’s slaughterhouse and wet market (key sources of water pollution) have likewise moved forward with the proposed transfer of the slaughterhouse to a new location while incorporating the necessary wastewater management facilities at the start of the new facility’s construction. Meanwhile, consultations, budgeting and initial engineering designs (which include wastewater management features for the wet market) have now been initiated for the proposed reconfiguration of the city’s public market.
Furthermore, the Baguio Water District (BWD) and the city government are initiating discussions to transfer the wastewater management responsibilities to BWD. Water districts in urbanized cities like Baguio are mandated by law to manage wastewater services.
In terms of improving drainage and flood management, an initial estimate of USD 15 million have been leveraged from both national and local sources.
The Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), handling drainage improvements along national roads have implemented/are implementing drainage projects in the City Camp Lagoon such as the DPWH tunnel construction, and drainage canal debris interceptor. It has also embarked on the rehabilitation of the city and national roads’ drainage systems and flood mitigation works on the city’s river systems.
On the other hand, the City Engineering Office has improved the city’s drainage systems. In addition, it has significantly accomplished Baguio’s sinkhole protection program. Sinkholes facilitate the natural drainage of surface runoff in the city. The protection of sinkholes from blockages caused by debris is one of the major PFS recommendations.
From the monitoring visit, it was seen that the ongoing and completed urban infrastructure related to integrated wastewater management in Baguio City are linked to the PFS prepared with the assistance of CDIA back in 2016. Even as the implementation of wastewater management projects encountered delays, most of the drainage infrastructure projects have been funded and executed as planned.
Factors that facilitated the implementation of the PFS-prioritized projects include: (1) alignment of the projects to the city and national plans; (2) financial support from the city and national government; and (3) strong demand from city stakeholders to find a long-term solution to the flooding problem in the city.
The CDIA experience in Baguio City offers a number of lessons relating to preparing projects on wastewater and drainage management. These include: (1) the value of incorporating a comprehensive climate change resilience approach in the project design; (2) importance of adopting a consultative and inclusive project prioritization and design process to ensure ownership of project outputs; and (3) the importance of incorporating capacity development and institutional strengthening measures in project designs to ensure sustainability of project operations and benefits to the city residents.

Source: https://cdia.asia/2019/12/10/baguio-city-takes-steps-to-ease-water-pollution/


Mayor Calls Out Plastic Producing Companies: Collect Back Your Containers
Establishments using single-use plastic for their products are encouraged to set up a system for them to collect back or recover their packaging containers and lessen plastic pollution in the communities.
Mayor Benjamin B. Magalong believes this can be a long-term corporate social responsibility project among plastic producing companies to strengthen community efforts in addressing global warming and climate change impacts.
The mayor seeks to meet with plastic producing companies to reiterate his call, particularly the distributors of water bottles, soft drinks and other products using sachet packaging since these are the majority of wastes collected in the central business district during clean-up activities.
Maria Victoria Tenefrancia of the Zero Waste Baguio, Inc. (ZWBI) said the city and volunteer groups might be conducting information and education campaigns on the harmful effects of plastic pollution but as long as plastic is being allowed as a product packaging by large corporations, pollution will still be inevitable.
“The answer to plastic pollution is to reduce the production of plastic by big companies on a global scale,” Tenefrancia said.
Lingling Claver also of ZWBI explained that plastic production utilizes fuel and, in the process, emits greenhouse gases which add to the heat index and global warming, thus the need to advocate against plastic pollution in the national and global scale.
In Baguio City, the City General Services Office collects an average of 200 tons of non-biodegradable waste every day, mostly plastics.
These are to be sorted at the staging area of the city at the Dairy Farm before being hauled out to an engineered sanitary landfill in Capas, Tarlac.
In 2022, the Extended Producer Responsibility Act (EPRA) was passed into law amending Republic Act No. 9003, otherwise known as the Ecological Solid Waste Management Act of 2000, to institutionalize the extended producer responsibility on plastic packaging waste.
The EPRA requires obliged enterprises (OEs), by themselves or collectively, with or without a Producer Responsibility Organization (PRO) to prepare and register with the National Solid Waste Management Commission their EPR Programs to reduce and/or recover for reuse, recycling, treatment, or proper ecological disposal the plastic packaging waste that they release or released to the domestic market.

Source: https://new.baguio.gov.ph/news/mayor-calls-out-plastic-producing-companies-collect-back-your-containers


Environmental Costs
Tourism in Baguio has resulted in several significant environmental costs, including deforestation, pollution, and solid waste management issues.
The construction of new tourist facilities, such as hotels and restaurants, has led to deforestation, further exacerbated by the influx of tourists during peak season. The loss of trees disrupts the natural ecosystem and contributes to the worsening of Baguio’s air quality.
Air and noise pollution are also growing concerns. The increasing number of motor vehicles in the city, many of which are privately owned or used for tourism purposes, results in harmful emissions that have a detrimental impact on air quality.
Noise pollution from vehicle traffic and construction activities also disturb the peace and tranquility that Baguio was once known for.
Solid waste management is another critical issue. The surge in tourist numbers has led to an increase in the volume of garbage generated, putting significant pressure on the city’s waste management system. Improper waste disposal and littering by tourists and tourism-related service providers further aggravate this problem.

Source: https://thebaguiochronicle.com/opinion/green-minded-economic-recovery-at-what-cost/

