Baguio is classified as a highly urbanized city (HUC). It is geographically located within Benguet, serving
as the provincial capital from 1901 to 1916,[10] but has since been administered independently from
the province following its conversion into a chartered city. The city is the center of business, commerce,
and education in northern Luzon, as well as the seat of government of the Cordillera Administrative
Region.[11] According to the 2020 census, Baguio has a population of 366,358.[4]

Biological Diversity
The variability among living organism from all sources including
terrestrial, marine and aquatic ecosystems and ecological
complexes of which they are part. This includes diversity within
species, between species and ecosystems.

BIOLOGICAL RESOURCE
Includes genetic resources, organism or parts thereof,
population, or any other biotic component of ecosystem with
actual or potential use or value humanity.

CANOPY
A continuous cover of branches and foliage formed collectively
by the crowns of adjacent trees consisting of one several
layers.

CARBON EMISSION
The release of carbon from a source such as but not limited to
living organisms, fossils fuels, and volcanic emissions into the
atmosphere over a specified area and period of time

CARBON OFFSET
The result of any action of any action specifically undertaken
to prevent the release of or to remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere in order to balance emissions taking place elsewhere.

CARBON RESERVOIR

A component of the climate system, other than the atmosphere
which has the capacity to store, accumulate or release a
substance of concern, e.g. carbon, a greenhouse gas or
precursor. Oceans, soils, and forest are examples of
reservoirs of carbon.

CARBON SOURCE
Any process or activity which releases greenhouse gas, aerosol
or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the atmosphere.

CLIMATE CHANGE
A condition attributed directly or indirect to human activity
that alters the composition of global atmosphere and which is,
in addition to natural climate variability, observed over
comparable time periods.

CLIMATE SYSTEM
The totality of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere and
geosphere and their interactions.

CLIMATE VARIABILITY
Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as
standard deviation, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the
climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of
individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural
internal process within the climate system (internal
variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic
external forces (external variability).

CONSERVATION

Protection of plant and animal habitat including the management
of renewable natural resource with the objective of sustaining
its productivity in perpetuity while providing for human use
compatible with sustainability of the resources.

CRITICAL HABITAT
Area outside protected areas order RA 7586 than is known
habitats of threatened species and designated as such based on
scientific data taking into consideration species and endimicity
and richness, presence of manmade pressures and threats.

CRITICAL WATERSHED
A drainage area of a river system supporting existing and
proposed hydroelectric power, irrigation works or existing water
facilities needing immediate protection and rehabilitation to
minimize erosion and improve water yield.

CRITICALLY ENDANGERED SPECIES
Species or subspecies that is facing extremely high risk of
extinction in the wild in the immediate future.

CULTIVATED LAND
Land not classified as forest or other wooded land used by man
for agriculture or pastures.

DAMAGED TREE
Any tree injured beyond the tolerable limit.

DECAY

Deterioration caused by wood destroying fungi.

DEFECT
Any irregularity or imperfection in a tree, log piece, product,
or lumber that reduces the volume of sound wood or lowers its
durability, strength, or utility value.

DEFOLIATION
The loss, shredding or removal of leaves from a tree or other
plant especially prematurely.

DEFORESTATION
The conversion of forest to another land use or the long-term
reduction of the tree canopy cover below the minimum 10%
threshold.

DEGRADATION
A decline in the productivity of an area of land or in its
ability to support natural ecosystems or types of agriculture.

DOMINANT TREES
Trees with crowns extending above the general level of the crown
cover and receiving full light from above and from the sides:
larger that the average trees in the stand with crowns welldeveloped.

DRAINAGE AREA

The horizontal projection of area from which a lake or stream
receives surface water originating as precipitation. Also called
drainage basin, river, basin, watershed area, or watersheds.

ECOLOGICAL SUCCESSION
The gradual change on the species structure and composition of
an ecological community over time.

ECOSYSTEM
A community of living organisms interacting with each other and
with their physical environment.

ECOSYSTEM RESILIENCE
The capacity of natural system to recover from disturbance.

ECOSYSTEM STABILITY
The capacity of a natural system to apply self-regulating
mechanisms so as to return steady state after an outside
disturbance.

ECOSYSTEM STRUCTURE
The physical and temporal distribution of various living
organisms in an ecosystem.

ECOSYSTEM SUSTAINABILITY
The capacity of an ecosystem to maintain its composition,
function, and structure over time, thus maintaining the
productivity of the land and diversity of plants and animals.

ECOTONE
The transition zone between two adjoining communities.

ECOTOURISM
Form of sustainable tourism within a natural and cultural
heritage area where community participation, protection and
management of natural resources, culture and indigenous
knowledge and practices, environmental education and ethics as
well as economics.

ECOZONE OR SPECIAL ZONE
Selected area with highly developed, or which have the potential
to be developed into, agroindustrial, tourist recreational,
commercial, banking investment and financial centers whose
meters and bounds are fixed or determined by Presidential
proclamation.

EMISSION
Any air contaminant pollutant, gas stream or unwanted sound from
a known source that is passed into the atmosphere.

ENDANGERED SPECIES
Species or subspecies that is not critically endangered but
whose survival in the wild is unlikely if the casual factors
continue operating. Species with small populations that could be
threatened if the environment worsens.

ENDEMIC SPECIES

Species or subspecies that are naturally occurring and found
only within specific area in the country.

ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA
Area delineated as environmentally sensitive such that
significant environmental impact are expected if certain type of
proposed projects or programs are located, developed or
implement in it.

EVENAGED FOREST
Stand of trees in which there are only small differences in age
among individual trees.

EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE
The area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea which shall
not exceed beyond 200 nautical miles from the baseline as
defined under existing laws.

EXPERIMENTAL FOREST
Forest land set aside by the DENR Secretary exclusively for
scientific, educational and research purposes.

EX-SITU CONSERVATION
The conservation of components of biological diversity outside
their natural habitats.

FAST GROWING SPECIES
A tree species that grows relatively faster than common forest
trees and whose rotation age is 4 to 20 years with a mean annual

increment of at 10 cubic meter per hectare under favorable site
conditions.

FOREST
Land with an area of more than 0.5 hectare and tree crown cover
(or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10%. The trees
should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 meters at maturity
in situ. It consist either of closed forest formations where
trees of various storeys and undergrowth cover a high proportion
of the ground or open formations with a continuous vegetation
cover in which tree crown cover exceeds 10%. Young natural
stands and all plantations established for forestry purposes,
which have yet to reach a crown density of more than 10% or tree
height of 5 meters are included under forest.
FOREST BIOME
Reflects the ecological and physiognomic characteristics of the
vegetation and broadly corresponds to climatic regions of the
earth. In this document, it is used in reference to boreal,
temperature and tropical forest biomes.

FOREST BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
The variability among forest living organisms and the ecological
processes of which they are part. It includes diversity in
forest within species, and ecosystems and landscapes.

FOREST COVER
Natural and man-made forests, including forests within wetlands
and built-up areas.

FOREST DEGRADATION
Changes within the forest whether natural or human-induced which
negatively affect the structure of function of the stand or

site, and thereby lower the capacity to supply products and/or
services resulting to a degraded forest.

FOREST DISTURBANCE
Any relatively discrete event in time that disrupts ecosystem,
community or population structure and changes resources,
substrate availability, of the physical environment.

FOREST ECOSYSTEM
A dynamic complex of plant, animal and microorganism communities
and their abiotic environment interacting as a functional unit,
where trees are a key component of the system. Humans, with
their cultural, economic and environmental needs are integrated.

FOREST FRAGMENTATION
(1) Break up of a forest landscape by various forest and nonforest uses. (2) Any process that results in the conversion of
formerly continuous forest into patches of forest separated by
non-forest lands.

FOREST IMPROVEMENT
Changes within the forest, which positively affect the structure
or function of the stand or site, and thereby increase the
capacity to supply products and services.

FOREST INFLUENCES
All the modifying effects of forest cover on the environment,
particularly on water supplies, soil, and microclimate.

FOREST LAND

Includes public forest, permanent forest or forest reserves, and
forest reservations.

FOREST MANAGEMENT
The process of planning and implementing practices for
stewardship and use of forest land aimed at fulfilling relevant
ecological, economic, and social function of the forest in a
sustainable manner.

FOREST RESERVATION
Forest land which has been reserved by the President of the
Philippines for any specific purpose or purposes.

FOREST RESOURCES
Includes soil and all elements found on it, above and below the
ground in an area classified as forest land.

FOREST RESTORATION
A management strategy applied in degraded primary forest to
enhance and accelerate natural processes of forest regeneration
in order to regain the elastic capacity of the forest ecosystem.

GREENHOUSE EFFECT
The effect produced as greenhouse gases allow incoming solar
radiation to pass through the earth's atmosphere, but prevent
part of the outgoing infrared radiation from the earth's surface
and lower atmosphere from escaping into outer space. This
process occurs naturally and has kept the earth's temperature
about 59 degrees Fahrenheit (15 degrees Celsius) warmer than it
would otherwise be. Current life on earth could not be sustained
without the

natural greenhouse effect. Synonymous to GLOBAL WARMING.

GREENHOUSE GASES
Those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere both natural
anthropogenic, that absorb and re-emit infrared radiation. The
major GHGs are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous
oxide (N2O). Less prevalent greenhouse gases are
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur
hexafluoride (SF6).

HABITAT
A place or environment where a species or subspecies naturally
established its population.

HABITAT LOSS
The permanent conversion of the habitat to an area where the
original species can no longer exist.

INDIGENOUS SPECIES
Species or genotypes that have evolved in the same area, region
or biotope and are adapted to the specific predominant
ecological conditions at the time of establishment.

INFILTRATION
The movement of water through the soil surface into the ground.

IN-SITU CONSERVATION
Conditions where genetic resources exist within ecosystems and
natural habitats, and in the case of domesticated or cultivated

species, in the surroundings where they have developed their
distinctive properties.

INTERMEDIATE TREE
A tree whose crown cover extends into the lower portion of the
main canopy of even-aged stands or, in uneven-aged stands into
the lower portion of the canopy formed by the tree's immediate
neighbors but shorter in height than the co-dominant and
receiving little direct light from above and no direct light
from the side.

INVASIVE SPECIES
Species of flora and fauna which may be accidentally or
deliberately introduced to an area that may cause or likely to
cause economic, environmental damage, and harm to human health.

IRRIGATION WATER
Portion of a runoff that is being used in irrigation. The
intentional application of water to the soil usually for the
purpose of crop production.

LAND
Resources both man-made and natural, found on the surface,
below, and above the ground including inland waters and the air
therein.

LAND CLASSIFICATION
A system for determining land of the public domain into forest
land, mineral land, national parks, and agricultural land based
on the 1987 Constitution. In current practice, land of the
public domain are classified into either forest land and
alienable & disposable land.

LAND COVER
The observed physical and biological cover of the earth's land,
as vegetation and man-made features.

LAND EVALUATION
A process whereby the potential of land for the particular use
is estimated. It may be categorized as qualitative,
quantitative, or economic evaluation.

LAND RECLASSIFICATION
The process of allocating the desired alienable and disposable
land of the public domain to specific uses such as agriculture,
residential, industrial, or commercial.

LAND SUITABILITY
The applicability of a given type of land for a specific kind of
land use.

LAND TENURE
The arrangement of right that allows a person or a community to
use specific pieces of land and associated resources (e.g.
water, trees, etc) in a certain period of time and for a
particular purpose.

LAND TYPE
A recognizable and definable landscape (i.e., combination of
land forms, topography and vegetation) possessing a particular
climate, and usually characterized by one type of soil or parent
material and a type of land use practiced over a long period.

LAND UNIT
An area of land defined in terms of land qualities and
characteristics that may be demarcated on a map. A hierarchy of
land units might consist of land provinces, land systems, land
forms and terrain units.

LAND USE
The manner of utilizing the land, including its allocation,
development and management.

LANDSCAPE
A heterogeneous land area distinguished by differences in land
forms, vegetation, land use, cultural features, and aesthetic
characteristics within a geographical region.

MINERAL RESERVATION
Areas established and proclaimed as such by the President of the
Philippines upon the recommendation of the Director through the
Secretary of DENR including submerged land within the contiguous
zone exclusive economic zone.

NATIVE SPECIES
Species that is normally found as part of a particular
ecosystem.

NATURAL BIOTIC AREA
A protected area under the NIPAS which is set aside to allow the
way of life of societies living in harmony with the environment
to adapt to modern technology at their pace.

NATURAL FOREST
Forest composed of indigenous trees, not planted by man.

NATURAL MONUMENT
A protected area under the NIPAS which is relatively small area
focused on protection of small features to protect or preserve
nationally significant natural features on account of their
special interest or unique characteristics.

NATURAL REGENERATION
The establishment of a plant or a plant age class from natural
seeding, sprouting, suckering or layering.

OPEN FOREST
Formations with discontinuous tree layer with coverage of at
least 10% and less than 40%. They are either managed or
unmanaged forests, in initial state of succession.

PINE FOREST
Forest stand composed primarily of native pine species, e.g.,
Pinus kesiya and the Pinus merkusii.

PIONEER SPECIES
Plants capable of invading bare sites (e.g. newly exposed soil)
and persisting there or colonizing them until supplanted by
successional species.

PLANTATION FOREST
Forest stands established by planting or seeding in the process
of afforestation or reforestation.

PREMIUM SPECIES
A group of trees species utilized for special purposes that
demand either high quality, durability, beauty or strength.

PRIVATE LAND
Any land belonging to any private person or group of person or
juridical entity by virtue of statutory and/or customary laws.

PRODUCTION FOREST
Forest lands that can be made available for timber and
agroforestry production, range lands for grazing, and other
forest lands special uses.

PROPAGATED SPECIES
A plant which has been cultured by a man intervention.

PROTECTED AREA
An identified portion of hand and water set aside by reason of
their unique physical and biological significance, managed to
enhance biological diversity and protected against destructive
human exploitation.

PROTECTION FOREST

An area wholly or partly covered with woody vegetation managed
primarily for its beneficial effects on water, climate, soil,
aesthetic value and preservation of genetic diversity.

PUBLIC FOREST
Land of the public domain which has not been the subject of the
present system of classification for the determination of which
lands are needed for forest purposes and which are not.

PUBLIC LAND
All land of the public domain except which are those not covered
by the statutory and customary laws.

RECREATIONAL ZONE
A portion of the protected area which has high recreational,
tourism, educational, or environmental awareness values where
sustainable ecotourism, recreational, conservation education or
public awareness activities may be allowed as prescribed in the
management plan.

REFORESTATION
The establishment of forest plantations on temporarily unstocked
lands that are considered as forest. Also called as artificial
regeneration.

REGENERATION
The process of reestablishing a forest stand by natural or
artificial means.

RENEWABLE RESOURCE

Resource whose supply becomes available for use at different
time intervals and in which present use does not diminish future
supply.

REPRODUCTIONS
All trees below 5 centimeters in DBH and at least 1.3 meters (30
centimeters for pine) in height.

RESIDUAL FOREST
The status or condition of a forest subsequent to commercial
logging and which there is more or less sufficient or adequate
volume of residuals or the desired species of trees of future
harvest.

RESOURCE RESERVE
An extensive and relatively isolated uninhabited area normally
with difficult access designated as such to protect natural
resources of the area for future use, and to prevent or contain
development activities that could affect the resource pending
the establishment of objectives which are based upon appropriate
knowledge and planning.

SANITATION CUTTING
A direct control measure which involves the removal of all
infested trees containing the brood or attacking adults or
disease inoculums form an infested area o reduce the source of
infestation/ infection and prevent further build up and spread
of pests at the fastest possible time to minimize economic and
ecological impact/damage on the natural stand/plantation.

SELECTIVE LOGGING

A systematic removal of mature, over-mature and defective trees
in such a manner that leave adequate number and volume of
healthy residual trees of desired species necessary to assure
future crop of timber and forest cover for the protection and
conservation of soil, water and wildlife.

SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
A field of human endeavor included in the concept of "watershed
management" but specifically devoted to the effective use of
water resource for human good.

SOIL EROSION
The detachment and transport of soil materials brought about by
water, surface runoff, wind, gravity, earthquake and others. It
could be man-induced or geological (nature process) in nature.

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs.

SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT
The process of managing a forest to achieve one or more clearly
specified objectives of management with regard to production of
a continuous flow of desired forest products and services
without undue reduction of its inherent values and future
productivity and without undesirable effects on the physical and
social environment.

SUSTAINABLE USE
The use of the components of biological diversity in a way and
at a rate that does not lead to a long-term decline thereby

maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of
present and future generations.

TENURE
Guaranteed peaceful possession and use of specific forest and
land area and the resources found therein, covered by an
agreement, contract or grant which cannot be altered or
abrogated without due process.

TIMBER
Wood material which include standing trees in a form suitable
for construction, carpentry, joinery, or reconversion for
manufacturing purposes.

TREE
A woody and perennial plant, typically large and with a welldefined stem or stems carrying a more or less definite crown;
sometimes defined as attaining a minimum diameter of 12.7
centimeters and a minimum height of 4.6 meters at maturity with
no branches within 1 meter.

TREE FARM
Any small forest land or tract of land purposely planted with
tree crops

TREE PARK
A particular area within a barangay city or municipality which
has been identified by an LGU and delineated by DENR exclusively
for growing trees of any kind, flowering ornamental, that have
scenic, aesthetic and ecological value.

TROPICAL RAINFOREST
A type of forest found in areas with high regular rainfall and
no more than two months of low rainfall, and consisting of a
completely closed canopy of trees that prevents penetration of
sunlight to the ground and discourages ground-cover growth.

URBAN AREA
An area within city limits or densely populated containing
built-up elements of residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional sector.

URBAN FORESTRY
The establishment and management of forest in urban environment
for physiological and psychological well being of the people.

VEGETATION
The total mass of plant life that occupies a given area.

VULNERABLE SPECIES
Species or subspecies that is not critically endangered nor
endangered but is under threat from adverse factors throughout
their range and is likely to move to the endangered category in
the near future.

WATER QUALITY
The characteristics of water which define its use in terms of
physical, chemical, biological, bacteriological or radiological
characteristics by which the acceptability of water is
evaluated.

WATER RESOURCES
Refers to the quality and quantity of water produced naturally
as one of the Earth's major resources.

WATERSHED
(1) A land area drained by a stream fixed body of water and its
tributaries having a common outlet for surface-runoff. (2) A
land area drained by a stream or fixed body of water and its
tributaries having a common outlet for surfacerunoff Also basin,
catchments.

WATERSHED MANAGEMENT
The process of guiding and organizing land and other resource
uses in a watershed to provide desired goods and services
without adversely affecting soil and water resources.

WATERSHED RESERVATION
A forest land reservation established to protect or improve the
conditions of water yield thereof or reduce sedimentation.

WEATHERING
The mechanical or chemical disintegration and discoloration of
surface of wood caused by exposure to light, action of dust and
sun carried by wind, and alternate shrinking and swelling of
surface fibers brought about by changes in the weather.

WILDERNESS AREA
Land of the public domain which has been reserved as such by law
to preserve its natural conditions, maintain its hydrologic
quality and restrict public use in the interest of national
welfare and security.

WILDLIFE
All wild species of plants and animals.

WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
The practical application of scientific and technical principles
to wildlife and population and habitat so as to maintain or
manipulate such population essentially for recreational or
scientific purposes.

WILDLIFE REFUGE
An area designated for the protection of wild animals, within
which hunting and fishing are either prohibited or strictly
regulated.

WILDLIFE SANCTUARY
A protected area under the NIPAS which assures the natural
conditions necessary to protect nationally significant species,
groups of species, biotic communities or physical features of
the environment where these may require specific human
manipulations for their perpetuation.

WILDLIFE TRADE
The act of engaging in the exchange, exportation or importation,
purchase or sale of wildlife, their derivatives or by-products,
locally or internationally.

WOOD WASTES
The collective term for logging and processing wastes.

YOUNG PLANTATION FOREST
A forest plantation where trees have not yet reached a height of
5 meters.

